---
title: "RWD Statistical Methods"
date: 2023-07-14T15:58:37-04:00
tags: ["statistics", "method", "RWD", "logistic", "Propensity Score"]
draft: false
---

Common Statistical Methods in RWD Analysis
</br>

## Regression methods may not be possible 

- Lack of Covariate Information: Regression methods rely on the availability of relevant covariate information to adjust for confounding variables. If important covariates are missing or poorly measured in the observational data, regression methods may not be able to adequately control for confounding.

- Nonlinearity or Complex Relationships: Regression models assume linear relationships between the independent variables and the outcome. In observational studies, the relationships between variables may be nonlinear or complex, making it difficult to capture these relationships accurately using regression models.

- Violation of Assumptions: Regression models have certain assumptions, such as independence of observations, linearity, homoscedasticity, and absence of multicollinearity. If these assumptions are violated in the observational data, regression results may be biased or unreliable.

- Selection Bias: In observational studies, treatment or exposure assignment is typically nonrandom, leading to selection bias. Regression models may not fully account for selection bias, resulting in biased estimates of treatment effects.

- Unmeasured Confounding: Despite careful adjustment for available covariates, there may still be unmeasured confounding factors that affect both treatment assignment and the outcome. Regression models cannot address the impact of unmeasured confounding variables, leading to potential bias in the estimated treatment effects.

- Imbalance between treatment groups: When there is significant imbalance in the distribution of observed covariates between treatment and control groups, regression methods may not adequately control for confounding factors, leading to biased estimates of treatment effects.

- High-dimensional data: Regression methods may become unwieldy or computationally intensive when dealing with high-dimensional data, where the number of variables is very large relative to the sample size.

- Missing data: Regression methods can be sensitive to missing data, leading to biased estimates or reduced statistical power if the missing data are not handled appropriately.

In contrast, propensity score (PS) methods offer attractive features by providing intuitive checks for balance between treatment groups without relying on specific assumptions about functional form or linearity. PS methods can help mitigate some of the challenges mentioned above, making them a popular choice for analyzing observational health data.

## Logistic regression frequently outperformed propensity score methods, especially for large datasets
Researchers analysing observational data often face difficult analytical choices, whereas PS approaches are not easy to implement in large databases of electronic health records. Our results show how key features of a dataset (size, exposure prevalence, and imbalance in PS) affect the performance of several approaches aiming to address confounding. This study suggests that multiple logistic regression is relatively robust to low exposure prevalence and imbalance in PS, outside of very small sample sizes. For large sample sizes, multiple logistic regression was clearly the preferred method, especially in the main scenario, whereas PS methods performed poorly as imbalance in PS distributions increased, and this was not mitigated by large sample size or balanced group sizes. This highlights the importance of examining overlap in PS if these methods are to be used but also suggests that their performance is worst when the problem they are intended to solve is most severe. Coverage of logistic regression was inferior to 1-to-1 and nearest neighbor PS matching methods in some large-data scenarios, but what was driven by much larger standard errors in these two matching approaches, whereas logistic regression remained the best performer in mean absolute error and bias. In large observational studies, multiple regression estimation appears to be the optimal choice, both in terms of simplicity and performance. ([Jack Wilkinson, et al. J of Clin Epi, 2022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2022.09.009))

## Comparison of Logistic Regression versus Propensity Score When the Number of Events Is Low and There Are Multiple Confounders
The aim of this study was to use Monte Carlo simulations to compare logistic regression with propensity scores in terms of bias, precision, empirical coverage probability, empirical power, and robustness when the number of events is low relative to the number of confounders. The authors simulated a cohort study and performed 252,480 trials. In the logistic regression, the bias decreased as the number of events per confounder increased. In the propensity score, the bias decreased as the strength of the association of the exposure with the outcome increased. Propensity scores produced estimates that were less biased, more robust, and more precise than the logistic regression estimates when there were seven or fewer events per confounder. The logistic regression empirical coverage probability increased as the number of events per confounder increased. The propensity score empirical coverage probability decreased after eight or more events per confounder. Overall, the propensity score exhibited more empirical power than logistic regression. Propensity scores are a good alternative to control for imbalances when there are seven or fewer events per confounder; however, empirical power could range from 35% to 60%. Logistic regression is the technique of choice when there are at least eight events per confounder ([M. Soledad Cepeda, et al., Am J Epi, 2003](https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/158/3/280/70529))

